# scripting4biology-python

This book is also available from leanpub at https://leanpub.com/scripting4biology-py. You can also choose the bundle -
https://leanpub.com/b/scripting4biology.


Should life scientists learn scripting languages?  Absolutely yes.

Biology is increasingly becoming data intensive, and that means the researchers are spending more time parsing through large data files 
than working on the bench. In the meanwhile, computer languages are becoming easy to use and learn. For example, R made statistical 
analysis and visualization straightforward, whereas python and PERL greatly simplified string processing and large-scale data analysis.

In the current paradigm, the biologists seek help from core facilities or specially trained bioinformaticians for analysis of their data. 
That arrangement is very inefficient, and I see many parallels between biology of today and physics of the early 90s in that respect. When 
I joined graduate school, my professor did not know any programming and had to request his students to get all kinds of simple and complex 
calculations done.  That was frustrating for him and us, because we were busy with classes in the beginning and with our own research in 
the end. When his requests were different from our work, we had to switch context to his problem and write programs. That meant we could
not invest as much time into exploring parameters or variations to the program as he could, if he had full control over the process.

"It was often difficult for one person to communicate all the scientific ideas to another and get things done."

In case of my professor, at least his questions were related to our research topic. It is unclear how an independent bioinformatician
at a core facility can learn the contexts of many different biological questions and develop solutions tailored to the cases. A recent 
paper discussing the work of bioinformatics core facilities wrote [1] -

"To give greater support to researchers, our centre set out to develop a series of standardized services. We documented the projects that we took on over 18 months. Forty-six of them required 151 data-analysis tasks. No project was identical, and we were surprised at how common one-off requests were (see .Routinely unique.). There were a few routine procedures that many people wanted, such as finding genes expressed in a disease. But 79% of techniques applied to fewer than 20% of the projects. In other words, most researchers came to the bioinformatics core seeking customized analysis, not a standardized package.

Another issue is that projects usually become more complex as they go along. Often, an analysis addresses only part of a question and requires follow-up work. For example, when we unexpectedly found a weak correlation between a protein receptor and a signalling response, getting a more-robust answer required refining our analysis to accommodate distinct signalling pathways orchestrated by the protein. An expansion typically doubled the time spent on a project; in one case it increased the time fivefold."


Learing Matlab was the solution for my professor. Right after joining, I spent some time helping him learn Matlab, and he never had to 
ask anyone to do his analysis again. Moreover, Matlab was so easy that mostly he learned Matlab by himself by practicing. My role was 
to get him over the initial barrier and help occasionally, when he got stuck.

Life scientists are at the same juncture today and I recommend them to learn R and at least one scripting language. This book and its 
associated training module will help them get over the initial barrier. The most important advice - you have to get your hands dirty.
Please email classes@homolog.us to apply for a cloud account and get started.

The objective of this book and its associated training modules is to introduce biology students to scripting languages. We are choosing to keep the discussions short so that you can go straight to the computer and learn by solving actual problems. Getting hands dirty is the only way to master the languages, and the task is fairly easy as this book will show you.


i) We do not use any framework, ii) we choose relevant problems.


1. Core services: Reward bioinformaticians [http://www.nature.com/news/core-services-reward-bioinformaticians-1.17251#/]
